=== p.205 ===
Weekly epide
Relevé épidém
28 APRIL 2017, 92th YEAR / 28 AVRIL 20
No 17, 2017, 92, 205–228
http://www.who.int/wer
Measles vaccines: WHO
position paper – April 2017
Introduction
In accordance with its mandate to provide
guidance to the Member States on health
policy matters, WHO issues a series of
regularly updated position papers on
vaccines and combinations of vaccines
against diseases that have an international
public health impact. These papers are
concerned primarily with the use of
vaccines in large-scale immunization
programmes. They summarize essential
background information on vaccine
preventable diseases and vaccines and
conclude with the current WHO position
on the use of vaccines worldwide.
The papers are reviewed by external
experts and WHO staff, and are reviewed
and endorsed by the WHO Strategic Advi-
sory Group of Experts (SAGE) on immu-
nization (http://www.who.int/immuniza-
tion/sage/en). The GRADE methodology is
used to systematically assess the quality
of available evidence. The SAGE decision-
making process is reflected in the
evidence-to-recommendation table.1 A
description of the processes followed for
the development of vaccine position
papers is available at: http://www.who.int/
immunization/position_papers/position_
paper_process.pdf
The position papers are intended to be
used mainly by national public health offi-
cials and managers of immunization
programmes. They may also be of interest
to international funding agencies, vaccine
advisory groups, vaccine manufacturers,
the medical community, the scientific
media and the general public.
1 Guidance for the development of evidence-based vaccine-rela-
ted recommendations. Available at http://www.who.int/immu-
nization/sage/Guidelines_development_recommendations.
pdf; accessed January 2017.
=== p.206 ===
This position paper incorporates the most recent devel-
opments in the field of measles and includes removal
of introduction criteria for the routine second dose of
measles-containing vaccine (MCV2), guidance on when
to vaccinate infants from 6 months of age, and guidance
on re-vaccination of HIV-infected children receiving
highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART). It
replaces the 2009 WHO position paper on measles
vaccines.2 Recommendations on the use of measles
vaccines were last discussed by SAGE in November 2013,
October 2015 and October 2016; evidence presented at
these meetings can be accessed at: www.who.int/immu-
nization/sage/meetings/2013/november/presentations_
background_docs/en/, www.who.int/immunization/sage/
meetings/2015/october/presentations_background_
docs/en/ and www.who.int/immunization/sage/meet-
ings/2016/october/presentations_background_docs/en/.
Background
Epidemiology
Measles is one of the most contagious diseases of
humans. It is caused by the measles virus and occurs
as a seasonal disease in endemic areas. In tropical zones,
most cases of measles occur during the dry season,
whereas in temperate zones, incidence peaks during late
winter and early spring.
Before the introduction of measles vaccine in 1963,
major epidemics occurred approximately every 2 to
3 years and it is estimated that 30 million cases of
measles and more than 2 million deaths occurred glob-
ally each year, and that by the age of 15 years, more
than 95% of individuals had been infected with measles
virus.3
Measles is preventable and can be eliminated by vacci-
nation. During 2000–2015, the global annual reported
measles incidence declined by 75% from 146 to 35 cases
per million population. In 2015, there were an estimated
134 200 measles deaths globally, representing a 79%
decline since 2000.4
The average age for acquiring measles depends on
biological and epidemiological factors, mainly popula-
tion immunity and birth rate. In certain settings (low
income countries or refugee camps), low population
immunity, high birth rates and high population density,
lead to increased transmission in younger age groups
including infants and pre-school children. As vaccina-
tion coverage increases, the average age of measles
infection can shift to adolescents and young adults.
These older groups remain susceptible because they had
not been vaccinated or exposed to wild-type measles
virus due to decreased transmission among younger
vaccinated groups.5 In the absence of efforts to vacci-
2 See No. 35, 2009, pp. 349–360.
3 Strebel PM et al. (2017). Chapter 21 - Measles vaccine. In: Offit SA, Plotkin WA,
Orenstein PA (eds.). Vaccines (7th Edition). [In press]
4 See No. 45, 2016, pp. 525–536.
5 Rota PA et al. Measles. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2016 Jul 14;2:16049.
206
=== p.207 ===
nate the older susceptible populations, measles virus
introduction can result in an outbreak, reflecting the
immunity gaps among these age cohorts.
In 2010, the World Health Assembly (WHA) identified
3 milestones for measles control by 2015: (1) increased
routine coverage with the first dose of measles-contain-
ing vaccine for children 1 year of age to ≥90% nation-
ally and ≥80% in every district; (2) reduction in global
annual measles incidence to <5 cases per million popu-
lation; and (3) reduction in global measles mortality by
95% from the 2000 estimate.6 In 2012, the WHA endorsed
the Global Vaccine Action Plan with the objective to
eliminate measles in 4 of the 6 WHO Regions by 2015
and in 5 Regions by 2020.7 Member States in all WHO
Regions have adopted measles elimination goals to be
reached by or before 2020. Measles elimination was veri-
fied in the Region of the Americas in September 2016.8
Elimination of measles is defined as the interruption of
measles transmission in a defined geographical area
that has lasted at least 12 months, and is verified after
it has been sustained for at least 36 months. High popu-
lation immunity is required to interrupt measles virus
transmission due to its high infectivity. The herd protec-
tion threshold for measles is the highest of all vaccine-
preventable diseases and varies in different settings,
ranging from 89% to 94%.9 Mathematical modelling has
estimated the herd protection threshold at 92–95% in
the United States of America (USA).10 In 2015, estimated
worldwide coverage of the first dose of measles vaccine
was 85% (ranging from 74% in the African Region to
96% in the Western Pacific Region in 2015), with cover-
age remaining stable since 2009. Although estimated
global coverage with a second dose of measles-contain-
ing vaccine has been steadily increasing since 2000, it
reached only 61% in 2015. In spite of the widespread
use of measles vaccines worldwide, measles remains an
important cause of death and disability in countries
with limited health infrastructure. Among the estimated
20.8 million infants who did not receive the first dose
of measles vaccine in 2015, 53% resided in 6 countries:
India (3.2 million), Nigeria (3 million), Pakistan
(2 million), Indonesia (1.5 million), Ethiopia (0.7 million)
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (0.6 million).4
6 Global eradication of measles: report by the Secretariat. World Health Organization,
Geneva, 2010. Available at http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_files/wha63/
a63_18-en.pdf; accessed January 2017.
7 Global Vaccine Action Plan 2011-2020. World Health Organization, Geneva, 2013.
Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/global_vaccine_action_plan/
GVAP_doc_2011_2020/en/, accessed December 2016.
8 Pan American Health Organization. Plan of Action for Maintaining Measles, Rubella,
and Congenital Rubella Syndrome Elimination in the Region of the Americas: Final
Report [Internet]. 55th Direction Council; 66th session of the WHO Regional Com-
mittee for the Americas; 26-30 September 2016; Washington, DC. Washington, DC:
PAHO; 2012 (Resolution CD55/INF/10). Available at http://www.paho.org/hq/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=12528%3Aregion-americas-decla-
red-free-measles, accessed December 2016.
9 Thompson, KM. Evolution and use of dynamic transmission models for measles and
rubella risk and policy analysis. Risk Analysis 2016; 36(7):1383–1403.
10 De Serres G, Gay NJ, Farrington CP. Epidemiology of transmissible diseases after
elimination. Am J Epidemiol 2000; 151: 1039–1048.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.208 ===
In countries where vaccination has substantially reduced
the incidence of measles, failure to maintain very high
coverage of childhood immunization in all districts will
result in a resurgence of the disease.
Pathogen
Measles virus is a single-stranded, enveloped, negative
sense RNA virus in the genus Morbillivirus of the family
Paramyxoviridae. Although susceptible monkeys may
be infected with measles virus, there is no significant
animal reservoir and humans are the only natural host.
Transmission is primarily person-to-person by airborne
respiratory droplets that disperse within minutes, and
transmission can also occur through direct contact with
infected secretions. Transmission from asymptomatic
exposed immune persons has not been demonstrated.
There is only one antigenic type of measles virus. As
the virus has for decades retained its monotypic anti-
genic structure, there has been no observed change in
vaccine effectiveness.11, 5 The genome encodes 8 proteins
including the haemagglutinin (H) and the fusion (F)
proteins, which are surface proteins important for cell
entry. The lifelong immunity that follows infection is
attributed to neutralizing antibodies against the
H protein.12 Sequencing of the measles virus genome
has so far identified 24 different genotypes that can be
used to track transmission and verify elimination.13
Recent evidence suggests that measles virus infection
initially occurs in the lower respiratory tract, where the
virus probably enters alveolar macrophages and sub-
epithelial dendritic cells. Subsequently, the virus is
transported to regional lymph nodes resulting in repli-
cation in the lymphatic system, viraemia and leukopae-
nia.3
Disease
The incubation period for measles usually lasts
10–14 days (range, 7–2314) from exposure to onset of
first symptoms, which generally consist of cough, fever,
malaise, conjunctivitis, and coryza. The characteristic
morbilliform rash appears 2–4 days after onset of the
prodrome. Patients are usually contagious from about
4 days before eruption of the rash until 4 days after
eruption, when the levels of measles virus in the respi-
ratory tract are highest.15, 16 The typical maculopapular
rash is often accompanied by fever that peaks at 39.0–
11 Module 7: measles update 2009. The Immunological basis for immunization series.
World Health Organization, Geneva, 2009. Available at http://www.who.int/immu-
nization/documents/ISBN9789241597555/en/index.html, accessed January 2017.
12 de Swart RL et al. Relative contributions of measles virus hemagglutinin- and fusion
protein-specific serum antibodies to virus neutralization. Journal of Virology. 2005;
79:11547–11551.
13 See No. 18, 2016, pp. 240–246.
14 Fitzgerald TL et al. Measles with a possible 23 day incubation period. Communi-
cable Diseases Intelligence. 2012; 36: 277–280.
15 Griffin, D E. in Fields Virology (eds Fields, B. N.Howley, P. M.Cohen, J. I. & Knipe,
D. M.) pp. 1042–1069 (Wolters Kluver/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013).
16 Robbins FC. Measles: clinical features. Pathogenesis, pathology and complications.
Am J Dis Child. 1962 Mar;103:266–273.
208
=== p.209 ===
40.5 °C. Prior to the onset of rash, bluish-white Koplik’s
spots, which are pathognomonic for measles, may be
seen in the oral mucosa. In uncomplicated measles
cases, patients improve by the third day after rash onset,
and have fully recovered 7–10 days after onset of
disease.17
The severity of measles varies widely, depending on
several host and environmental factors. The risk of
developing severe or fatal measles increases for children
aged <5 years, and persons living in overcrowded condi-
tions, those who are malnourished especially with vita-
min A deficiency, and those with immunological disor-
ders, such as AIDS. Complications occur in approxi-
mately 30% of reported cases depending on age and
predisposing conditions.17 Relatively common complica-
tions of measles include otitis media, laryngotracheo-
bronchitis (croup), diarrhoea and pneumonia. In chil-
dren in developed countries, otitis media occurs in
7–9% of cases, diarrhoea in 8% of cases, and pneumo-
nia in 1–6%17, 3 Post-infectious measles encephalitis
occurs in about 1–4 per 1000–2000 cases, and subacute
sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) develops several
years after the infection in about 1 per 10 000–100 000
cases.18 Particularly severe complications of measles
which occur in immunocompromised individuals are
an acute progressive encephalitis (measles inclusion-
body encephalitis), and a characteristic giant cell pneu-
monia.3 In developing countries, persistent diarrhoea
with protein-losing enteropathy may ensue, particularly
in infants. In these countries, where malnutrition,
particularly vitamin A deficiency, and exposure to other
infectious diseases are common, the case-fatality rate
for measles is usually 3–6%, but can be as high as 30%,
particularly among displaced or isolated, immunologi-
cally naïve populations.3 In developed countries death
due to measles is rare and the case-fatality rate is
usually 0.01–0.1%.19 The greatest risk of death is in chil-
dren younger than 1 year and in adults older than 30
years.3, 17 In HIV-infected children, the case-fatality rate
has been reported to be as high as 50%.20
Vitamin A deficiency contributes to delayed recovery
and to the high rate of post-measles complications. In
addition, measles infection may precipitate acute vita-
min A deficiency and xerophthalmia. As a result, measles
is an important cause of preventable childhood blind-
ness, particularly in Africa.3
17 Perry RT and Halsey NA. The Clinical Significance of Measles: A Review. J Infect Dis.
2004 May 1;189(Supplement 1):S4–16.
18 Campbell H et al. Review of the effect of measles vaccination on the epidemiology
of SSPE. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2007;36:1334–1348.
19 Wolfson LJ et al. Estimates of measles case fatality ratios: a comprehensive review
of community-based studies. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2009;38, 192–205.
20 Palumbo P et al. Population-based study of measles and measles immunization in
human immunodeficiency virus-infected children. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 1992
Dec;11(12):1008–1014.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.210 ===
Diagnosis
The WHO definition of suspected measles is a case with
fever and maculopapular (non-vesicular) rash, or a case
where a health-care worker suspects measles. Labora-
tory testing is necessary for definitive diagnosis as
other conditions may mimic measles, including infec-
tions with rubella virus, parvovirus B19 (erythema
infectiosum or Fifth disease), human herpes viruses 6
and 7 (roseola infantum), dengue virus, and Streptococ-
cus pyogenes (scarlet fever). Laboratory confirmation of
measles is based on detection of anti-measles virus IgM
antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), or the detection of measles virus RNA by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) in throat swaps, oral fluid or nasopharyngeal
mucus or urine.3
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for measles. Case manage-
ment of measles focuses on supportive care as well as
the prevention and treatment of measles complications
and secondary infections.21 Since measles is highly
contagious, patient isolation is an important interven-
tion to prevent further spread of the virus. However,
increasing population immunity through vaccination is
the most effective way to prevent outbreaks.
Supportive care should be provided, including relieving
common symptoms such as fever, cough, nasal conges-
tion or rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis, and sore mouth.
Nutritional support is recommended to reduce the risk
of malnutrition due to diarrhoea, vomiting and poor
appetite associated with measles. Breastfeeding should
be encouraged where appropriate. Oral rehydration salts
should be used as needed to prevent dehydration.
Although one study22 reported that patients who
received prophylactic antibiotics had fewer episodes of
pneumonia and conjunctivitis and greater weight gain,
antibiotics are generally not recommended for the treat-
ment of measles unless secondary bacterial complica-
tions develop, such as pneumonia or otitis media.3
Vitamin A should be administered to all acute cases
irrespective of the timing of previous doses of vitamin
A. Vitamin A oral dosage should be given immediately
on diagnosis and repeated the next day; 50 000 IU
should be given to infants aged <6 months, 100 000 IU
to infants aged 6–11 months and 200 000 IU to children
aged ≥12 months.23 If the child has clinical ophthalmic
signs of vitamin A deficiency such as Bitot’s spots, a
third dose should be given 4–6 weeks later. Even in
21 Treating measles in children. World Health Organization, Geneva, 1996. Available
at http://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/63706, accessed December 2016.
22 Garly ML et al. Prophylactic antibiotics to prevent pneumonia and other complica-
tions after measles: community based randomised double blind placebo controlled
trial in Guinea-Bissau. BMJ. 2006 December 16;333(7581):1245.
23 Vitamin A supplementation in infants and children 6–59 months of age. Available
at http://www.who.int/elena/titles/guidance_summaries/vitamina_children/en/,
accessed February 2017.
210
=== p.211 ===
countries where measles is not usually severe, vitamin
A should be given in all cases of severe measles.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
In unimmunized or insufficiently immunized individu-
als, measles vaccine may be administered within
72 hours of exposure to measles virus to protect against
disease. If disease does develop, symptoms are usually
not severe and the duration of illness is shortened.3 For
susceptible individuals for whom MCV is contraindi-
cated, human immune globulin may be given after
measles virus exposure, particularly to pregnant women,
infants aged <6 months, and individuals with impaired
immune systems. If administered within 6 days of expo-
sure, this method of passive immunization can prevent
illness or reduce its severity.24
Naturally-acquired immunity
Whereas the presence of circulating, neutralizing anti-
body against the H antigen is sufficient to prevent infec-
tion with measles virus, cell-mediated immunity is
required to clear the virus once infection has occurred.
Long-lasting, possibly lifelong, immunological memory
following wild-type virus infection includes both
continued production of measles virus-specific antibod-
ies and the circulation of measles virus-specific CD4+
and CD8+ T lymphocytes. Although the levels of anti-
measles-virus antibodies may diminish over time, the
ability to rapidly mount secondary humoral and cellular
immune responses ensures protection from infection.
Infants can be protected temporarily by maternal anti-
measles IgG antibodies which cross the placenta to the
fetus. Depending on the concentration of passively-
acquired maternal antibodies, infants are usually
protected against measles for 6–9 months. However,
infants whose mothers have vaccine-induced immunity
receive less maternal antibody than infants whose
mothers had had wild-type measles virus infection,
resulting in a shorter duration of protection. A large
infective dose of virus may occasionally overcome the
protection afforded by maternal antibodies, and measles
has been observed in neonates and infants whose moth-
ers escaped wild-type virus infection and had never
been vaccinated against measles.3
Measles vaccines
Measles vaccines were first licensed in 1963. Currently,
only live attenuated products are available on the
market. An inactivated vaccine was developed but later
withdrawn because vaccinated children developed a
more severe atypical form of measles upon subsequent
measles virus infection. In the 1980s, live attenuated
measles vaccines of increased titre (>105 TCID , the
50
virus titre required to infect 50% of host cells in culture)
24 McLean HQ et al. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention of
Measles, Rubella, Congenital Rubella Syndrome, and Mumps, 2013: Summary
Recommendations of the Advisor Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR. 2013 Jun 14;62(RR-04): 1–34.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.212 ===
were tested as an approach to overcome the inhibitory
effect of maternal antibodies on the infant’s immune
response, but this was discontinued after reports of
excess mortality in girls who had received these high
titre vaccines as compared with girls immunized with
standard titre vaccines.25
Several live attenuated measles vaccines are available,
either as monovalent vaccine or in combination with
rubella, mumps, or varicella vaccines, or some combina-
tion of these. When using the combined measles–rubella
(MR) vaccine, measles–mumps–rubella (MMR) vaccine,
or measles–mumps–rubella–varicella (MMRV) vaccine,
the protective immune response to each individual
vaccine antigen is largely unchanged.
Vaccine characteristics, content, dosage,
administration, storage
Most live attenuated measles vaccines originate from
the Edmonston strain of measles virus. Well known
vaccine strains derived from the original Edmonston
isolate include the Schwarz, Edmonston–Zagreb, AIK-C
and Moraten strains, all in use since the 1960s. Nucleo-
tide sequence analysis of selected genes has shown
minimal (<0.6%) differences among these strains.26
Non-Edmonston strains, such as CAM-70, TD-97, Lenin-
grad-16 and Shanghai-191, tend to show more sequence
divergence. Because there is insufficient evidence of
clinically significant differences among these attenuated
vaccines in terms of effectiveness and adverse reactions,
they are collectively referred to as “measles vaccine”,
whether used as a single antigen or in MCV combina-
tions. Measles vaccine, as a single antigen or combina-
tion, protects equally well against all wild-type measles
virus genotypes. Measles vaccine may contain small
amounts of the antibiotic neomycin (<25 μg) as a resi-
due of the manufacturing process, or stabilizers includ-
ing human albumin, sorbitol and hydrolyzed gelatin.
Internationally available measles vaccines are safe,
effective, and may be used interchangeably within
immunization programmes. WHO developed a set of
recommendations for manufacturing and quality
control (production and lot-release), safety and efficacy
of MCVs.27
25 Knudsen KM et al. Child mortality following standard, medium or high titre measles
immunization in West Africa. Int J Epidemiol. 1996 Jun;25(3):665–673.
26 Parks CL et al. Comparison of predicted amino acid sequences of MV strains in the
Edmonston vaccine lineage. Journal of Virology. 2001;75:910–920.
27 Requirements for measles, mumps and rubella vaccines and combined vaccine
(live). WHO Technical Report Series, No. 840 (Annex 3), World Health Organization,
Geneva, 1994. Available at http://www.who.int/biologicals/publications/trs/areas/
vaccines/mmr/WHO_TRS_840_A3.pdf?ua=1, accessed December 2016.
212
=== p.213 ===
The standard volume of MCVs is 0.5 ml. Measles
vaccines are usually injected subcutaneously, but are
also effective when injected intramuscularly. The
preferred site of injection is the anterolateral thigh
or upper arm depending on the child’s age. Measles
vaccines are licensed for use starting as early as
6 months of age. In countries where incidence and
mortality from measles are high in the first year of
life, manufacturers recommend that vaccination be
initiated at 9 months or shortly thereafter. In coun-
tries where infection occurs later in life, vaccination
can be delayed until 12–15 months of age. For
primary immunization, 2 doses are recommended.
The second dose of MCV is usually provided in the
second year of life or at school entry, but it may be
administered as early as 4 weeks after the first dose.
The second dose is needed to protect children who
did not develop protective immunity after the first
dose.
Before use, the lyophilized vaccine is reconstituted with
sterile diluent supplied by the manufacturers. A preser-
vative-containing reconstitution fluid is not recom-
mended because it would inactivate the vaccine virus.3
Each dose of 0.5 ml of the reconstituted vaccine contains
>1000 viral infective units of the vaccine strain. In
general, it is recommended that freeze-dried vaccine be
stored in a refrigerated condition below +8 °C. However,
MCV may also be stored between -70 °C and -20 °C for
long-term preservation of viral potency.3 The diluent
must not be frozen and can be stored at ambient
temperature; it should be cooled to 2–8 °C before recon-
stitution. Reconstituted measles vaccine loses about
50% of its potency after 1 hour at 20 °C and almost all
potency after 1 hour at 37 °C. The vaccine is also sensi-
tive to light and should be stored in coloured glass vials
protected from sunlight. After reconstitution, the
vaccine must be stored in the dark at 2–8 °C and used
within 6 hours.
The timing of the first and second doses of MCV (MCV1
and MCV2) varies across countries and regions. In
general, countries with long-standing immunization
programmes reaching good coverage and low measles
incidence offer both doses at older ages and rely on
routine services for delivery. Countries with weaker
health infrastructure use vaccination campaigns to
increase coverage with 2 doses of MCVs. The diversity
in measles vaccination schedules results from differ-
ences among countries in rates of endemic measles
virus transmission, the health service infrastructure, as
well as in the ability of programmes to access children
at different ages.
Immunogenicity, efficacy and effectiveness
Measles vaccine induces both humoral and cellular
immune responses similar to those induced by wild-
type measles virus infection, although antibody concen-
trations are usually lower. After vaccination, transient
measles virus-specific IgM antibodies appear in the
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.214 ===
blood and IgA antibodies appear in mucosal secretions.
IgG antibodies are produced subsequently and persist
in the blood for years. Vaccination also induces measles
virus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes.11
Antibodies to H and F proteins contribute to virus
neutralization and are the best correlates of protection
against measles virus infection. The presence of neutral-
izing antibodies, commonly demonstrated by the plaque
reduction neutralization assay, is considered the most
reliable correlate of protection (protective level,
>120 mIU/ml). In many laboratories, however, immunity
is assessed on the basis of ELISA results, a method
which is less sensitive at lower antibody concentra-
tions.11
Wild-type measles virus causes significant immunosup-
pression that lasts for several years and has been asso-
ciated with increases in overall infectious disease
mortality in children.28, 29 Available data suggest that the
current WHO recommended schedule for MCV has a
beneficial effect on all-cause mortality in children that
cannot be explained by the prevention of measles
alone.30
Vaccinating infants before or at the age of 6 months often
fails to induce seroconversion due to the immaturity of
the immune system as well as the presence of neutral-
izing maternal antibodies.31 Primary vaccination failures
occur in up to 10–15% of infants vaccinated at age
9 months.3 In a review of field studies evaluating measles
vaccine effectiveness of a single dose of MCV adminis-
tered at 9–11 months and greater than 12 months of age,
the median vaccine effectiveness was 84% (interquartile
range (IQR), 72–95%) and 92.5% (IQR, 84.8–97%), respec-
tively.32 The development of a high avidity antibody
response is critical for the development of protective
immunity to measles virus. Antibody avidity to measles
virus is generally lower in children vaccinated at 6 or 9
months of age compared with the avidity obtained in
children vaccinated at age 12 months.33 Therefore, the
recommended age at vaccination must balance the risk
of primary vaccine failure, which decreases with increas-
ing age, with the risk of measles virus infection prior to
vaccination which increases with age.
Studies on revaccination in children who did not respond
to their first dose of measles vaccine demonstrate that
approximately 95% develop protective immunity after the
second dose.3 In people with pre-existing antibodies,
revaccination may not result in sufficient vaccine virus
28 Mina MJ et al. Long-term measles-induced immunomodulation increases overall
childhood infectious disease mortality. Science. 2015 May 8;348(6235):694–699.
29 Stowe J et al. No evidence of an increase of bacterial and viral infections following
Measles, Mumps and Rubella vaccine. Vaccine.2009;27:1422–1425.
30 See No. 21, 2014, pp. 221–236.
31 Caceres VM et al. Factors determining prevalence of maternal antibody to MV
throughout infancy: a review. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2000, 31:110–119.
32 Uzicanin A and Zimmerman L. Field effectiveness of live attenuated measles-contai-
ning vaccines: a review of published literature. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jul;204 Suppl
1:S133–148.
33 Grading of scientific evidence – table I: Effectiveness of measles vaccine in young
children and adolescents. Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/docu-
ments/measles_grad_effectiveness.pdf?ua=1
214
=== p.215 ===
replication to boost antibody concentrations. However,
although vaccine-induced antibody concentrations
decline over time and may become undetectable, immu-
nological memory persists and, following exposure to
measles virus, most people who have been vaccinated
produce a protective immune response.3
As some individuals do not mount a protective immune
response to MCV1, especially when it is given before
12 months of age, a single dose may not lead to protec-
tion. In countries where MCV1 is administered during
the second year of life, primary vaccine failure rates are
approximately 5%.3
The antibody response to measles vaccine can be
impaired in HIV-infected children. In several studies
conducted early in the HIV epidemic in the USA,
approximately 25–33% of HIV-infected children
responded to a single dose of MCV, while in Malawi,
only 64% of HIV-infected children seroconverted after
2 doses of MCV compared to 94% of HIV-exposed but
uninfected children.34
Several studies have examined the response to measles
vaccination or revaccination after initiating highly
active antiretroviral treatment (HAART) and suggest
that children receiving HAART are more likely to
respond to revaccination than HIV-infected children
not receiving HAART.35
Duration of protection
Although the duration of protection following measles
vaccination is more variable than following wild-type
virus infection, evidence indicates that a single dose
of correctly administered measles vaccine which
results in seroconversion will afford lifelong protec-
tion for most healthy individuals.3 Even in countries
where measles is no longer endemic, antibodies to
measles virus persist for decades.3, 36, 37 Studies using
IgG avidity measurements to separate primary vacci-
nation failures from secondary vaccination failures
suggest that secondary failures may occur at least
occasionally due to waning immunity.38, 39, 40 However,
declining immunity does not appear to play a major
role in measles virus transmission.
34 Grading of scientific evidence – table II: Safety and immunogenicity in HIV infected
children. Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/measles_grad_HIV.
pdf?ua=1
35 Report to SAGE on Evidence Supporting Measles Revaccination for HIV infected
Children Receiving Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy. Available at http://www.
who.int/immunization/sage/meetings/2015/october/7_Measles_Revaccination_
HIV_Infected_Children_Report_SAGE_26_September_2015.pdf?ua=1, accessed
January 2017.
36 Davidkin I et al. Persistence of measles, mumps, and rubella antibodies in an MMR-
vaccinated cohort: a 20-year follow-up. J Infect Dis. 2008;197: 950–956.
37 Dine MS et al. Persistence of vaccine-induced antibody to measles 26-33 years after
vaccination. J Infect Dis. 2004 May 1;189 Suppl 1:S123–130.
38 Paunio M et al. IgG avidity to distinguish secondary from primary measles vaccina-
tion failures: prospects for a more effective global measles elimination strategy.
Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy. 2003;4:1215–1225.
39 Pannuti CS et al. Identification of primary and secondary measles vaccine failures
by measurement of immunoglobulin G avidity in measles cases during the 1997 São
Paulo epidemic. Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratory Immunology. 2004;11:119–122.
40 Grading of scientific evidence – table III: Duration of protection following measles
immunization. Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/measles_grad_dura-
tion.pdf?ua=1
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.216 ===
Vaccine safety
Adverse reactions following measles vaccination are
generally mild and transient. Within 24 hours of vacci-
nation, vaccine recipients may experience slight pain
and tenderness at the site of injection, which usually
resolves in 2–3 days. Approximately 7–12 days after
vaccination, systemic reactions occur in about 5–15%
of recipients including fever of >39 °C for 1–2 days. A
transient rash occurs in about 2% of recipients. Adverse
events, with the exception of anaphylactic reactions, are
less likely to occur after MCV2 vaccination.41, 42
Serious adverse events such as toxic shock syndrome,
septicaemia, and occasionally even fatal events, follow-
ing measles vaccine administration (particularly when
using multi-dose vials) can occur because of failure to
adhere strictly to the manufacturer’s recommendations
when handling, reconstituting and administering
measles vaccines.
Allergic reactions to vaccine components including
neomycin and the stabilizers have also been reported
after measles vaccination. Hypersensitivity reactions,
such as urticaria at the injection site, rarely occur after
measles vaccination. Anaphylactic reactions to MCV are
considered extremely rare, occurring at a rate of
3.5–10 cases per million doses. Anaphylactic reactions
are usually attributed to gelatin stabilizers used in
vaccine production and not to residual egg proteins.41
MCV occasionally induces febrile seizures. Studies have
reported seizure rates of 1 per 2941 and 1 per 1150 doses.
An association between residual seizure disorders and
measles vaccination has not been established. Transient
thrombocytopenia following measles vaccination occurs
rarely in approximately 1 per 30 000–40 000 vaccinated
children.41
Extensive studies in different countries have demon-
strated that there is no increased risk of permanent
neurological sequelae and no evidence to support an
increased risk of Guillain-Barré syndrome following
administration of MCVs. There is also very strong
scientific evidence that measles vaccination is not linked
to inflammatory bowel disease or to autism. The size of
the studied populations has afforded statistical power
sufficient to detect even rare associations.41, 42
As with single-antigen measles vaccine, adverse events
following administration of MMR and MMRV vaccines
are mostly mild and transient, although the rate of
febrile seizures occurring 7–10 days after the first dose
in children vaccinated with MMRV is about double
41 Information sheet. Observed rate of vaccine reactions – measles, mumps and
rubella vaccines, May 2014. World Health Organization, Geneva, 2014. Available at
http://www.who.int/vaccine_safety/initiative/tools/MMR_vaccine_rates_informa-
tion_sheet.pdf?ua=1, accessed December 2016.
42 Grading of scientific evidence – table IV: Safety of measles vaccine in young children
and adolescents. Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/documents/
measles_grad_safety.pdf?ua=1
216
=== p.217 ===
(9/10 000) that in children who receive MMR and vari-
cella vaccines separately at the same visit.43 However,
this increased risk of febrile seizures is not observed
when MMRV is administered as a second dose.44 Rarely,
symptoms characteristic of rubella, mumps, or varicella
may be observed following administration of MCVs that
include these vaccine viruses. Person-to-person trans-
mission of measles vaccine strains has not been docu-
mented.
In seriously immunocompromised individuals, includ-
ing those suffering from HIV infection, a transient
enhanced replication of vaccine viruses may occur and
result in death.41
Mild, concurrent infections are not considered a contra-
indication to vaccination, but MCVs should be avoided
if the patient has a high fever or other signs of serious
acute illness. Contraindications for MCVs include a
history of anaphylactic reactions or severe allergic reac-
tions to any component of the vaccine (e.g. neomycin
or gelatin), pregnancy, and immunosuppression. Measles
vaccine is contraindicated in cases of: severe immuno-
deficiency; advanced HIV disease; advanced leukaemia
or lymphoma; other serious malignant disease; treat-
ment with high-dose steroids, alkylating agents or anti-
metabolites; treatment with immunosuppressive thera-
peutic radiation.3
Special risk groups
HIV-infected children: The limited evidence available
indicates that measles vaccines are safe in HIV-infected
children. Measles vaccines are recommended for use in
HIV-infected individuals unless severely immunocom-
promised. A systematic review of safety and immuno-
genicity did not identify any study reporting measles
inclusion body encephalitis, giant cell pneumonia (asso-
ciated with measles vaccine in one adult with AIDS45),
or thrombocytopenia in an HIV-infected child.46
However, detection of such rare adverse events is chal-
lenging in settings with high HIV prevalence. A syste-
matic review and meta-analysis of the safety and immu-
nogenicity of measles vaccine in HIV-infected children
commissioned by the WHO Global Advisory Committee
on Vaccine Safety (GACVS)47 reported that there was no
increased risk of serious adverse events among HIV-
infected children when compared with uninfected chil-
dren.
43 What clinicians need to know about MMRV vaccine safety. Atlanta, US Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/vsd/mmrv.htm,
accessed April 2017.
44 Schink T et al. Risk of febrile convulsions after MMRV vaccination in comparison to
MMR or MMR+V vaccination. Vaccine. 2014 Feb 3;32(6):645–650.
45 Angel JB et al. Vaccine-associated measles pneumonitis in an adult with AIDS. Ann.
Intern. Med. 1998;129:104-106.
46 Scott P et al. Measles Vaccination in HIV-Infected Children: Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis of Safety and Immunogenicity. Oxford Journals Medicine & Health
The Journal of Infectious Diseases. Volume 204, Issue suppl 1.pp. S164-S178.
47 See No 32, 2009, pp. 325–332.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.218 ===
Serological assessment of measles antibody concentra-
tions after vaccination showed that measles vaccination
at age 6 months resulted in similar levels of protection
in HIV-infected and uninfected children (combined
relative risk [RR] 1.05; 95% confidence interval [CI],
0.83–1.34; heterogeneity I2, 65.7%; P=0.054).48 By age
9 months, fewer HIV-infected children (with or without
clinical signs of AIDS) responded to measles vaccine
than uninfected children (combined RR, 0.79; 95% CI,
0.61–1.02; heterogeneity I2, 81.5%; P=0.005). Two studies
suggested that the antibody response in HIV-infected
children waned faster than in uninfected children.34, 49
Pregnant women: Although measles virus has not been
shown to have any teratogenic effect, because measles
vaccine is a live attenuated vaccine and may pose a
theoretical risk to the developing fetus, in particular due
to fever that may result from vaccination, as a precau-
tionary measure it is not recommended for pregnant
women.50 However, no significant adverse effects to the
fetus have been reported following measles vaccination
during pregnancy.51 Inadvertent vaccination of pregnant
women with MCV is not considered an indication for
pregnancy termination.50
Health-care workers: Several studies have shown that
health-care workers (HCWs) are at increased risk of
measles compared to non-HCWs, and that measles
transmission in health-care settings poses substantial
risk of infection for infants and immunocompromised
individuals.3 The importance of vaccinating health
workers is underlined by the numerous measles
outbreaks occurring in health institutions, affecting
both health workers and patients. During 1985–1989 in
the USA, physicians had an 8-fold increased risk and
nurses a 2-fold increased risk of measles compared to
non-HCWs of the same age. Of the 120 measles outbreaks
that occurred in the USA during 1993 through 2001,
health-care facilities were the most commonly reported
setting.12, 52
Vaccine co-administration
As a general rule, live vaccines should be given either
simultaneously or at intervals of 4 weeks. An exception
to this rule is oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV), which can
be given at any time before, simultaneously with, or
after measles vaccination without interference in the
48 The heterogeneity I2 value is defined as the proportion of the total variation in esti-
mated risk ratios due to between-trial heterogeneity rather than to chance.
49 Grading of scientific evidence – table V: Measles revaccination of HIV-infected children
receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy. Available at http://www.who.int/im-
munization/policy/position_papers/measles_grad_hiv_revac.pdf
50 See No. 29, 2013, pp. 301–312.
51 Sukumaran L et al. Adverse Events Following Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine
in Adults Reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). 2003–
2013. Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official Publication of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. 2015 May 15;60(10):e58.
52 Gao J et al. Epidemic of measles following the nationwide mass immunization cam-
paign. BMC Infectious Diseases. 2013; 13: 139.
218
=== p.219 ===
response to either vaccine. Available data suggest that
MCVs may be co-administered at different anatomical
sites with other injectable vaccines including yellow
fever vaccine, inactivated poliovirus vaccine, diphtheria
and tetanus toxoids, whole cell and acellular pertussis
vaccine, meningococcal vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine, and
Haemophilus influenzae type b/hepatitis B (Hib/Hep)
vaccine.3 In one study,53 the co-administration of the
MMRV vaccine with combined diphtheria-tetanus-acel-
lular pertussis vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine, inactivated
poliovirus vaccine, and H. influenzae type b conjugate
vaccine (DTPa-HBV-IPV/Hib) was found to be immuno-
genic and well-tolerated for all antigens tested. MCVs
have also been reported to be safe and immunogenic
when co-administered with 10-valent pneumococcal
nontypeable H. influenzae protein D conjugate vaccine.54
Available data suggest that MCVs and Japanese enceph-
alitis virus vaccines may be co-administered at different
injection sites.55 Interferences may occur between MMR
and yellow fever vaccines if they are co-administered
in children aged <2 years.56 Co-administration of MCV
with HPV has not been studied.
Cost-effectiveness
Due to the availability of an inexpensive effective
vaccine, measles immunization is one of the most cost-
effective public health interventions in a wide range of
development settings.57 In Latin America and the
Carribean, high vaccination coverage (95%) in both
routine immunization programmes and campaigns was
estimated to achieve considerable cost savings compared
with moderate coverage (85%) of routine vaccination
alone.58 Vaccination with either 2 routine doses or
2 doses administered during a catch-up campaign were
both estimated to have an advantageous cost–benefit
ratio (>1) in Canada and the USA.59, 60 Where routine
vaccination coverage is low, measles vaccination through
campaigns or mobile outreach services has been shown
53 Zepp F et al. Immunogenicity and safety of a tetravalent measles-mumps-rubella-
varicella vaccine co-administered with a booster dose of a combined diphtheria-
tetanus-acellular pertussis-hepatitis B-inactivated poliovirus-Haemophilus
influenzae type b conjugate vaccine in healthy children aged 12–23 months. Euro-
pean Journal of Pediatrics. 2007;166:857–864.
54 Vesikari T et al. Safety and immunogenicity of a booster dose of the 10-valent
pneumococcal nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae protein D conjugate vaccine
co-administered with measles-mumps-rubella-varicella vaccine in children aged
12 to 16 months. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2010 Jun;29(6):e47–56.
55 Huang L-M et al. Concomitant administration of live attenuated Japanese encepha-
litis chimeric virus vaccine (JE-CV) and measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine:
randomized study in toddlers in Taiwan. Vaccine. 2014 Sep 15;32(41):5363–5369.
56 Nascimento Silva JR et al. Mutual interference on the immune response to yellow
fever vaccine and a combined vaccine against measles, mumps and rubella. Vac-
cine. 2011 Aug 26;29(37):6327–6334.
57 Thompson KM and Odahowski CL (2016). Systematic review of health economic
analyses of measles and rubella immunization interventions. Risk Analysis, 36(7),
1297–1314.
58 Acharya A et al. Cost-effectiveness of measles elimination in Latin America and the
Caribbean: a prospective analysis. Vaccine. 2002 Sep 10;20:3332–3341.
59 Pelletier L et al. A benefit-cost analysis of two-dose measles immunization in Canada.
Vaccine. 1998;16:989–996.
60 Zhou F et al. An economic analysis of the current universal 2-dose measles-mumps-
rubella vaccination program in the United States. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases. 2004;189 Suppl 1:S131–145.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.220 ===
to be cost-saving when compared to routine administra-
tion of a single dose.61 Separate studies in Africa and
south-east Asia found that adding measles vaccine to a
child-health intervention package was highly cost-effec-
tive.62, 63, 64 In general, programmes that provide 2 doses
of measles vaccine have been found to be highly cost-
effective, regardless of the strategy used to deliver the
doses.
Measles immunization saves high costs for the indi-
viduals affected, their families and the national health-
care system.65 An analysis of the return on investment
(which quantifies the net benefit gained for every dollar
invested) for 10 vaccines in 94 low and middle income
countries between 2011 and 2020, estimated that the
highest returns were associated with averting measles
at 58 times the cost (uncertainty range:25–105) through
2 routine doses and outreach campaigns.66
WHO position
Vaccination against measles is recommended for all
susceptible children and adults. The available live atten-
uated measles vaccines are safe and effective, provide
long-lasting protection, are inexpensive and may be
used interchangeably within immunization programmes.
Reaching all children with 2 doses of measles vaccine
should be the standard for all national immunization
programmes. Countries aiming at measles elimination
should achieve ≥95% coverage with both doses equita-
bly to all children in every district.
In addition to the first routine dose of MCV (MCV1),
all countries should include a second routine dose of
MCV (MCV2) in their national vaccination schedules
regardless of the level of MCV1 coverage.67 The addition
of MCV2 in the second year of life reduces the accumu-
lation of susceptible children by immunizing those who
did not respond to MCV1 or did not receive the first
dose. This measure has the further advantages of
61 Dayan GH et al. Cost-effectiveness of three different vaccination strategies against
measles in Zambian children. Vaccine. 2004;22:475–484.
62 Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. Macroeconomics and health: inves-
ting in health for economic development. Report of the Commission on Macroeco-
nomics and Health. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2001. Available at http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2001/924154550x.pdf, accessed January 2017.
63 Edejer TT et al. Cost effectiveness analysis of strategies for child health in develo-
ping countries. BMJ. 2005;331:1177.
64 Fiedler JL et al. The cost of Child Health Days: a case study of Ethiopia’s Enhanced
Outreach Strategy (EOS). Health Policy and Planning. 2008;23:222–233.
65 Thompson KM and Odahowski CL. The costs and valuation of health impacts of
measles and rubella risk management policies. Risk Anal. 2016 Jul;36(7):1357–
1382.
66 Ozawa S et al. Return On Investment From Childhood Immunization In Low- And
Middle-Income Countries, 2011-20. Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 Feb;35(2):199–
207.
67 Evidence-to-recommendation table for measles vaccine. Available at http://www.
who.int/immunization/policy/position_papers/measles_evidence_recommenda-
tion.pdf, accessed April 2017.
220
=== p.221 ===
lengthening the period between campaigns, helping to
establish a routine well-child visit during the second
year of life, and reducing the risk of outbreaks.
As the addition of routine MCV2 covers only a single
birth cohort and it takes time to achieve high rates of
population-wide coverage, countries conducting regular
campaigns to achieve high population immunity should
consider cessation of campaigns only when >90–95%
vaccination coverage has been achieved at the national
level for both MCV1 and MCV2, as determined by accu-
rate coverage data for a period of at least 3 consecutive
years.
Optimal timing for routine MCV1 and MCV2
In countries with ongoing transmission in which the
risk of measles mortality among infants remains high,
MCV1 should be administered at 9 months of age. In
these settings, on-time delivery of MCV1 is important
to ensure optimal protection during the susceptible
period in infancy. These countries should administer
the routine dose of MCV2 at age 15–18 months. The
minimum interval between MCV1 and MCV2 is 4 weeks.
In countries with low levels of measles transmission
(i.e. those nearing measles elimination or verified as
having eliminated endemic measles virus transmission)
and therefore the risk of measles virus infection among
infants is low, MCV1 may be administered at 12 months
of age to take advantage of the higher seroconversion
rates achieved at this age. Increasing the age of admin-
istration of MCV1 from 9 to 12 months represents a
rational and desirable policy change. However, before
implementing this change, policy-makers should review
local data on the age at which infants actually receive
measles vaccine, the coverage expected at 12 months
compared with 9 months, and the age-specific measles
incidence.
In countries where MCV1 is administered at 12 months
of age, the optimal age for delivering routine MCV2 is
based on programmatic considerations that achieve the
highest coverage of MCV2 and, hence, the highest popu-
lation immunity. Administration of MCV2 at
15–18 months of age ensures early protection of the
individual, slows the accumulation of susceptible young
children, may correspond to the schedule for other
routine immunizations (for example, a DTP booster,
PCV, or meningococcal vaccines). This measure also
supports the establishment of a policy on immunization
and other health interventions in the second year of
life. If MCV1 coverage is high (>90%) and school enrol-
ment is high (>95%), administration of routine MCV2
at school entry may prove an effective strategy for
achieving high coverage and preventing outbreaks in
schools.
In the following situations, a supplementary dose of
MCV should be given to infants from 6 months of age:
1. during a measles outbreak as part of intensified
service delivery;
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.222 ===
2. during campaigns in settings where the risk of
measles among infants < 9 months of age remains
high (e.g. in endemic countries experiencing regu-
lar outbreaks);
3. for internally displaced populations and refugees,
and populations in conflict zones;
4. for individual infants at high risk of contracting
measles (e.g. contacts of known measles cases or
in settings with increased risk of exposure during
outbreaks such as day-care facilities);
5. for infants travelling to countries experiencing
measles outbreaks;
6. for infants known to be HIV-infected or exposed
(i.e. born to an HIV-infected woman).
Measles vaccine immunogenicity and effectiveness are
lower at 6 months than at later ages, and there are
concerns about the long-term effectiveness of an early
2-dose schedule and its potential for later blunting of
immunity. MCV administered before 9 months of age
should therefore be considered a supplementary dose
and recorded on the child’s vaccination record as
“MCV0” unless the country has data showing high sero-
conversion when vaccination is carried out before
9 months of age. Children who receive a MCV0 dose
should also receive MCV1 and MCV2 at the recom-
mended ages according to the national schedule.
Available evidence on safety and immunogenicity of
rubella and mumps-containing vaccines support their
use from 6 months of age. Countries using MR or MMR
in their national schedule should use the combined
vaccine rather than measles-only formulations in all
children, including those aged <1 year.
Because many cases of measles occur in children aged
>12 months who have not been vaccinated, routine
delivery of MCV1 should not be limited to infants aged
9–12 months and routine delivery of MCV2 should not
be limited to infants aged 15–18 months of age. Every
opportunity (e.g. whenever children come in contact
with health services) should be taken to vaccinate all
children who missed one or both MCV routine doses,
particularly those <15 years of age. Policies prohibiting
the use of the vaccine in children >1 year of age, older
children and adolescents should be changed to allow
them to be vaccinated as necessary.
Irrespective of the strategy or schedule, the child’s
immunization card and the clinic’s vaccination register
should be designed to allow accurate recording of
supplementary (MCV0), routine (MCV1 and MCV2) and
campaign doses. Children should be screened for their
measles vaccination history at the time of school entry,
and those lacking evidence of receipt of 2 doses should
be vaccinated with any missing doses.
Vaccination campaigns
In countries where health systems are functioning only
moderately or weakly, implementation of regular
222
=== p.223 ===
measles vaccination campaigns can be a highly effec-
tive strategy for protecting children who do not have
access to routine health services, particularly if hard-
to-reach communities are targeted during the
campaign. At the community level, well planned and
executed campaigns can rapidly increase population
immunity and thereby interrupt measles virus trans-
mission (i.e. achieve herd protection). Campaigns can
also be used to close known immunity gaps (e.g.
targeting individuals who were missed during histor-
ical vaccine stock-outs or due to social disruptions).
In certain settings, nationwide campaigns may not be
feasible or cost-effective (e.g. due to civil unrest, polit-
ical instability, financial constraints or in very large
countries) and targeted subnational campaigns may
be implemented to reduce the accumulation of suscep-
tible individuals.
Because the risk of measles outbreaks is determined
by the rate of accumulation of susceptible people in
the population, programmes should use available
good quality data on population immunity (i.e. vacci-
nation coverage, surveillance, serological studies) to
monitor the accumulation of susceptible people and
conduct follow-up campaigns before the number of
pre-school children susceptible to measles approaches
the equivalent of one birth cohort, in order to prevent
an outbreak of measles. This approach has been found
to be programmatically useful in preventing large
outbreaks. However, for large countries and countries
which are close to measles elimination, a more exten-
sive assessment of the accumulation of susceptible
persons should be carried out at the subnational level.
As there is no single criterion for identification of the
target age range for measles or measles/rubella vacci-
nation campaigns, countries should integrate their
surveillance, demographic, survey and seroprevalence
data together with vaccination coverage information,
history of MCV and RCV use, and local knowledge to
determine the age distribution of susceptibility (age-
specific immunity gaps) and hence the target age
range/s for measles and MR campaigns. Additional
information to consider relative to MR campaigns is
rubella immunity among women of child-bearing age,
the epidemiology of rubella and CRS, age-specific
fertility rates, and the age of mothers of CRS-affected
infants. Mathematical modelling suggests a high qual-
ity measles campaign (reaching >90% of susceptible
children) targeting children aged <5 years is equally
effective and more cost-efficient than a lower quality
wider age range campaign (e.g. targeting children
aged <10 years reaching >70% of susceptible chil-
dren).68
68 Prada JM et al. Vaccine 2017. 35:1488–1493.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.224 ===
All MCV campaigns should follow established best prac-
tices, should be monitored to ensure readiness before
the campaign, and be independently monitored during
and after the campaign to ensure homogeneous vacci-
nation coverage of >95%.69 All doses given during
campaigns should be documented in the child’s vacci-
nation record and the number of zero-dose children
vaccinated (i.e. children who had not received any previ-
ous doses of MCV) recorded by age group.
Before discontinuing campaigns, a review should be
conducted by a national committee such as the national
immunization advisory group. The committee should
examine the following: historical data on vaccination
coverage for MCV1, routine MCV2 and campaigns both
at the national and district levels;70 degree of heteroge-
neity of routine coverage among districts; population
immunity profile; predicted rate of accumulation of
susceptible individuals in the absence of campaigns;
detailed epidemiology of measles including measles
outbreaks; and the performance of the measles surveil-
lance system. In the absence of adequate data, or if data
suggest that cessation of campaigns would allow popu-
lation immunity to drop below the herd immunity
threshold, campaigns should continue.
Ensuring that every child is vaccinated with 2 doses of
measles vaccine will require increased investment in
systems to record and monitor the administration of
both doses, including when they are delivered through
campaigns.
Choice of vaccines and their interchangeability
All commercially available live attenuated measles
vaccines, either as monovalent vaccine or in combina-
tion with rubella, mumps, or varicella vaccines, or some
combination of these, can be used interchangeably to
protect against measles. However, for programmatic
reasons (e.g. to reduce cold storage needs and vaccine
wastage), it is recommended that the same formulation
is used for both routine doses of MCV.
Co-administration
As a general rule, live vaccines should be given either
simultaneously or at intervals of 4 weeks. An exception
to this rule is OPV, which can be given at any time
before or after measles vaccination without interference
in the response to either vaccine. MCVs may be
co-administered at different anatomical sites with other
vaccines including Japanese encephalitis vaccine, yellow
fever vaccine, DTP-containing vaccines, meningococcal
vaccine, hepatitis B vaccine, inactivated poliovirus
vaccine, Haemophilus influenza type b conjugate
vaccine, and pneumococcal vaccines.
69 Planning and Implementing High-Quality Supplementary Immunization Activities
for Injectable Vaccines Using an Example of Measles and Rubella Vaccines. Field
Guide. Available at http://www.who.int/immunization/diseases/measles/SIA-Field-
Guide.pdf?ua=1, accessed January 2017.
70 A district is defined as the third administrative level in a country.
224
=== p.225 ===
Contraindications
MCVs should not be given to individuals with a history
of anaphylactic reactions or severe allergic reactions to
any component of the vaccine (e.g. neomycin or gelatin)
or those with any form of severe immunosuppression.
Mild concurrent infections are not a contraindication
to vaccination.
Vaccination of pregnant women
As a precautionary measure, measles vaccine – alone or
in combination with other vaccines – should be avoided
during pregnancy. No significant adverse outcomes for
fetus or mother following vaccination of pregnant
women have been reported. Inadvertent administration
of measles vaccine during pregnancy is not a reason
for terminating the pregnancy.
Vaccination of health-care workers
Because of the known risk of spreading measles from
HCWs to patients or from patients to HCWs, all HCWs71
and any staff who are in contact with patients should
be immune to measles.72 Verification of vaccination and/
or history of measles should be integrated into standard
infection control guidelines or other standards of care
for health-care workers. For HCWs who have contact
with patients, documentation of immunity should be
required before signing an employment contract or
entering into a training programme.
Vaccination of travellers
Susceptible individuals travelling to measles-endemic
areas are considered at risk of contracting measles.
Vaccine should be offered to children from 6 months of
age, adolescents and adults likely or known to be
susceptible.
Measles vaccination of HIV-infected individuals
Given the severe course of measles in patients with
AIDS, measles vaccination should be routinely admin-
istered to potentially susceptible, asymptomatic HIV-
infected children and adults. Vaccination may even be
considered for those with symptomatic HIV infection
if they are not severely immunosuppressed according
to conventional definitions. In areas where there is a
high incidence of both HIV infection and measles, an
initial dose of MCV may be offered as early as age
6 months (recorded as MCV0). The 2 routine doses of
MCV (MCV1 and MCV2) should then be administered
to these children according to the national immuniza-
tion schedule.
71 All persons involved in patient care such as health care professionals, residents,
students, laboratory staff, as well as persons in public health such as field workers,
epidemiologists, laboratory staff and community health-care workers.
72 Either written documentation of receipt of 2 doses of MCV and at least 1 dose of
RCV or positive serologic (IgG) test results from a proficient laboratory.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
=== p.226 ===
HIV-infected children vaccinated prior to the initiation
of HAART are at increased risk of measles because of
poor antibody responses following vaccination. While
HAART does not restore measles immunity acquired
after previous vaccine doses, it enables higher and more
prolonged antibody responses following revaccination.
An additional dose of MCV should be administered to
HIV-infected children receiving HAART following
immune reconstitution.73 If CD4+ T lymphocyte counts
are monitored, an additional dose of MCV should be
administered when immune reconstitution has been
achieved, e.g. when the CD4+ T lymphocyte count
reaches 20–25%. Where CD4+ T lymphocyte monitoring
is not available, children should receive an additional
dose of MCV 6–12 months after initiation of HAART.
Current evidence is insufficient to recommend an addi-
tional dose for children who start HAART prior to the
first dose of MCV.
A supplementary dose of MCV (recorded as MCV0)
should be considered for infants known to be exposed
(i.e. born to an HIV-infected woman) or soon after diag-
nosis of HIV infection in children older than 6 months
who are not receiving HAART and for whom the risk
of measles is high, with the aim of providing partial
protection until they are revaccinated after immune
reconstitution with HAART.
Surveillance and outbreak response
High quality measles case-based surveillance is a criti-
cal strategy for measles control and elimination. As
countries approach elimination, they should intensify
surveillance and move towards weekly reporting to the
WHO regional offices.74 Countries are encouraged to
adopt the approach outlined in the framework for veri-
fication of measles and rubella elimination.75 To limit
the impact of measles outbreaks, WHO recommends
surveillance for early detection, thorough assessment of
the risk of spread and of severe disease outcomes, iden-
tification of immunity gaps, and planning rapid
responses, including expanded use of MCVs.
A district or regional outbreak coordination committee
with broad representation should make the decisions
about the type of vaccination response to be imple-
mented at the local level. To protect individuals at high
risk during an outbreak, vaccination within 72 hours of
exposure may be given to modify the clinical course
of measles or prevent symptoms. In individuals for
whom vaccination is contraindicated, the administra-
tion of measles immune globulin within 6 days of expo-
sure may have a similarly beneficial effect.
73 Evidence-to-recommendation table for revaccination of HIV infected. Available
http://www.who.int/immunization/policy/position_papers/measles_evidence_re-
commendation_hiv.pdf; accessed April 2017.
74 See No. 9, 2013, pp. 89–100.
75 See No. 9/10, 2017, pp. 97–105.
226
=== p.227 ===
When determining whether a country or the WHO
Region as a whole has achieved elimination, the regional
verification commission should consider 5 lines of
evidence – disease epidemiology, population immunity,
quality of surveillance, sustainability of the programme,
and genotyping evidence – to allow for a comprehensive
evidence-based assessment of past programme perfor-
mance and future capacity to sustain elimination. These
lines of evidence should be evaluated together to estab-
lish the case for elimination.
Recommendations on selected research needs
Research is necessary to identify gaps in essential
evidence and programme barriers to achieving measles
and rubella/CRS elimination. Advances of major impor-
tance are in development, of which the most significant
are likely to be administration of measles vaccine
through microarray patches, and point-of-care diagnos-
tic tests. Microarray patches would allow house-to-
house vaccination and allow non-medically trained
personnel to administer vaccine, which would be of
great benefit for countries with limited human resources.
Such innovations would increase the likelihood of
success in reaching regional elimination goals.
Operational research can assist in appropriately guiding
the implementation of programmatic strategies and the
tailoring of approaches to local contexts. Programmatic
questions that should be addressed include: which
populations should be targeted for special immuniza-
tion efforts; optimal strategies for reaching hard-to-
reach populations, and adolescents and adults; how to
strengthen and enhance disease surveillance and
reporting; the best approaches to measuring vaccina-
tion coverage; strategies to communicate the benefits of
measles vaccination and minimize vaccine hesitancy;
and the economic impact of the disease. Research
targeting programmatic challenges is likely to yield the
most programmatic gains and should be prioritized. 
How to obtain the WER through the Internet
(1) WHO WWW server: Use WWW navigation software to
connect to the WER pages at the following address:
http://www.who.int/wer/
(2) An e-mail subscription service exists, which provides by
electronic mail the table of contents of the WER, together
with other short epidemiological bulletins. To subscribe,
send a message to listserv@who.int. The subject field
should be left blank and the body of the message should
contain only the line subscribe wer-reh. A request for
confirmation will be sent in reply.
RELEVE EPIDEMIOLOGIQUE HEBDOMADAIRE, No 17, 28 AVRIL 2017
